+++
title = "Coupled effects of climate teleconnections on drought, Santa Ana winds and wildfires in southern California"
date = "2021-01-01"
publication_types = ["2"]
authors = ["A. Cardil", "M. Rodrigues", "J. Ramirez", "S. de-Miguel", "C.A. Silva", "M. Mariani", "D. Ascoli"]
publication = "In: Science of the Total Environment, (765), https://doi.org/10.1016/j.scitotenv.2020.142788, https://www.scopus.com/inward/record.uri?eid=2-s2.0-85093963759&doi=10.1016%2fj.scitotenv.2020.142788&partnerID=40&md5=ffea6164d6edc4369d3f20849c2f6d4e"
abstract = "Projections of future climate change impacts suggest an increase of wildfire activity in Mediterranean ecosystems, such as southern California. This region is a wildfire hotspot and fire managers are under increasingly high pressures to minimize socio-economic impacts. In this context, predictions of high-risk fire seasons are essential to achieve adequate preventive planning. Regional-scale weather patterns and climatic teleconnections play a key role in modulating fire-conducive conditions across the globe, yet an analysis of the coupled effects of these systems onto the spread of large wildfires is lacking for the region. We analyzed seven decades (1953–2018) of documentary wildfire records from southern California to assess the linkages between weather patterns and large-scale climate modes using various statistical techniques, including Redundancy Analysis, Superposed Epoch Analysis and Wavelet Coherence. We found that high area burned is significantly associated with the occurrence of adverse weather patterns, such as severe droughts and Santa Ana winds. Further, we document how these fire-promoting events are mediated by climate teleconnections, particularly by the coupled effects of El Niño Southern Oscillation and Atlantic Multidecadal Oscillation. © 2020 Elsevier B.V."
abstract_short = ""
image_preview = ""
selected = false
projects = []
tags = []
url_pdf = ""
url_preprint = ""
url_code = ""
url_dataset = ""
url_project = ""
url_slides = ""
url_video = ""
url_poster = ""
url_source = ""
math = true
highlight = true
[header]
image = ""
caption = ""
+++
